DEP: deprecate `numpy.distutils`, and add a migration guide (#20875)
numpy/numpy: doc/source/reference/distutils_status_migration.rst

.. _distutils-status-migration:

Status of ``numpy.distutils`` and migration advice
==================================================

`numpy.distutils` has been deprecated in NumPy ``1.23.0``. It will be removed
for Python 3.12; for Python <= 3.11 it will not be removed until 2 years after
the Python 3.12 release (Oct 2025).

.. warning::

   ``numpy.distutils`` is only tested with ``setuptools < 60.0``, newer
   versions may break. See :ref:`numpy-setuptools-interaction` for details.

Migration advice
----------------

It is **not necessary** to migrate immediately - the release date for Python 3.12

> is October 2023, so you have a good amount of time left. It may be beneficial

Reviewer: Maybe this would age better without the "good amount of time left?"

```suggestion
is October 2023. It may be beneficial
```

to wait with migrating until there are examples from other projects to follow
(see below).

There are several build systems which are good options to migrate to. Assuming
you have compiled code in your package (if not, we recommend using Flit_) and
you want to be using a well-designed, modern and reliable build system, we
recommend:

1. Meson_
2. CMake_ (or scikit-build_ as an interface to CMake)

If you have modest needs (only simple Cython/C extensions, and perhaps nested
``setup.py`` files) and have been happy with ``numpy.distutils`` so far, you
can also consider switching to ``setuptools``. Note that most functionality of
``numpy.disutils`` is unlikely to be ported to ``setuptools``. The likely
exception is nested ``setup.py`` files, but this is not yet done (help with

> this is very welcome!).

Reviewer: May not age well. Could you point to an open issue and rephrase around whether that issue is closed?

```suggestion
this is very welcome!).
```

Author: agreed

.. _distutils-status-migration:

Status of ``numpy.distutils`` and migration advice
==================================================

`numpy.distutils` has been deprecated in NumPy ``1.23.0``. It will be removed
for Python 3.12; for Python <= 3.11 it will not be removed until 2 years after
the Python 3.12 release (Oct 2025).

Migration advice
----------------

It is **not necessary** to migrate immediately - the release date for Python 3.12
is October 2023, so you have a good amount of time left. It may be beneficial
to wait with migrating until there are examples from other projects to follow
(see below).

There are several build systems which are good options to migrate to. Assuming
you have compiled code in your package (if not, use Flit_) and you want to be

> using a well-designed, modern and reliable build system, your two best options

Author: I'll try a small rephrase. I don't think it's a controversial opinion though - not sure what the third-best build system would be, but it will be a pretty distant third either way.

> using a well-designed, modern and reliable build system, your two best options

Reviewer 2: Maybe a tiny rephrase, since there are other good ones as well, and Flit doesn't support SCM versioning, but it's 0-dependency, really simple (in the backend code), and part of the pypa, so hard not to recommend. Though @takluyver might not like a recommendation here, I don't know, he seems to not like "official" recommendations to use Flit. ;)

> using a well-designed, modern and reliable build system, your two best options

Author: I'll change to "we recommend". I think Thomas will be fine with a recommendation. Either way, we need to recommend something. This is aimed at people who don't know what they want/need, and we're already giving them four options - which is quite a bit.

> using a well-designed, modern and reliable build system, your two best options

Reviewer: ```suggestion
using a well-designed, modern and reliable build system, we recommend
```

> using a well-designed, modern and reliable build system, your two best options

Reviewer 3: I'm OK with NumPy recommending Flit - my concern was about recommendations in 'official' PyPA documentation that might be seen as making it the standard tool.

> using a well-designed, modern and reliable build system, your two best options

Author: Thanks, adopted the "we recommend" rephrase, and kept the Flit recommendation.

> are:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

1. Meson_
2. CMake_ (or scikit-build_ as an interface to CMake)

If you have modest needs and have been happy with ``numpy.distutils`` so far,

> you can also consider switching to ``setuptools``. Note that most functionality

Author: Good point, that's on lines 72-75. I'll think about how to cross-link or shuffle content around.

> you can also consider switching to ``setuptools``. Note that most functionality

Author: I added an inline explanation: _(only simple Cython/C extensions, and perhaps nested ``setup.py`` files) _

feature parity with ``numpy.distutils`` will be resolved. *Note: parity means a
large superset, but right now some BLAS/LAPACK support is missing and there are
a few open issues related to Cython.* SciPy uses almost all functionality that
``numpy.distutils`` offers, so if SciPy has successfully made a release with
Meson as the build system, there should be no blockers left to migrate, and
SciPy will be a good reference for other packages who are migrating.
For more details about the SciPy migration, see:

- `RFC: switch to Meson as a build system <https://github.com/scipy/scipy/issues/13615>`__
- `Tracking issue for Meson support <https://github.com/rgommers/scipy/issues/22>`__

NumPy itself will very likely migrate to Meson as well, once the SciPy
migration is done.

Moving to CMake / scikit-build
``````````````````````````````

See the `scikit-build documentation <https://scikit-build.readthedocs.io/en/latest/>`__
for how to use scikit-build. Please note that as of Jan 2022, scikit-build
still relies on setuptools, so it's probably not quite ready yet for a
post-distutils world. For more details on this, see

> `this blog post by Henry Schreiner <https://iscinumpy.gitlab.io/post/scikit-build-proposal/>`__.

Author: @henryiii if there is a better document to link for advice about migrating from `numpy.distutils` to `scikit-build` here, I'd love to hear it.

Author: Thanks @henryiii

Interaction of ``numpy.disutils`` with ``setuptools``

> -----------------------------------------------------

Author: Yes agreed, more and more people are going to run into this. Reference from the top sounds good.

> -----------------------------------------------------

Author: I added a warning at the top, with a link to this section.
